well good afternoon and welcome to the
coronavirus press conference from
Downing Street and I'm joined by dr.
Jenny Harris the deputy chief medical
officer for England today's data shows
that 1 million 120 9907 tests for
coronavirus have now been carried out in
the United Kingdom including a hundred
and five thousand 937 tests carried out
yesterday a hundred and eighty two
thousand two hundred and sixty people
have tested positive that's an increase
of four thousand eight hundred and six
cases since yesterday fourteen thousand
six hundred and ninety five people are
currently in hospital with coronavirus
down fifteen thousand one hundred and
eleven from the previous day and sadly
of those tested positive for current
virus across all settings twenty eight
thousand 131 have now died that's an
increase of 621 fatalities since
yesterday
these are heartbreaking losses for every
family affected and all our thoughts and
prayers are with their families and
their friends
Jenny will provide an update on the
latest data on coronavirus but first as
community secretary I want to update on
the steps we're taking to protect some
of the most vulnerable people in our
society as the Prime Minister set out
this week we've now passed the peak of
the virus and he will provide more
details on how we will address the
second phase of this battle next week we
all know that the restrictive measures
as necessary and as life-saving as they
are are difficult for everyone all of
you watching at home this afternoon have
made sacrifices big and small and I want
to thank you once again for all that
you're doing you're helping us as a
country to turn the tide on the virus
but some in our society for some in our
society these measures involve
sacrifices that none of us would wish
anyone to bear for victims of domestic
abuse
it means being trapped in a nightmare
the true evil of domestic abuse is that
it leaves vulnerable people including
children living in fear in the very
place where they should feel most safe
and secure inside their own home though
domestic violence can leave physical
masks the true extent of the inflicted
pain is much deeper than those marks it
can be invisible these are emotional
scars and scars but for some will never
heal and which can even pass to the next
generation whose young eyes see things
that they never should and hear things
that none of us would wish our children
to witness
as a father of three girls I cannot even
imagine women and young children being
put in this situation but they are and
we must be alive to the reality of what
is happening in all too many homes
across the country I want us to defend
the rights of those women and those
children wherever we can and that is
what we're going to do and this is not a
crime inflicted solely on women it
affects men too this government has
already prioritized tackling domestic
abuse the domestic abuse bill which had
its second reading in Parliament last
week is a landmark piece of legislation
which will create the first-ever legal
definition of domestic abuse and this is
important because it holds those
responsible to account and gives those
suffering at the hands of others more
confidence that action will be taken and
perpetrators brought to justice today I
can confirm but through the domestic
abuse bill the government will also be
ensuring that the victims of domestic
violence get the priority need status
that they need to access local housing
services much more easily this is a
fully funded commitment which will mean
that no victim of domestic violence
has to make the unbearable choice
between staying somewhere but they know
is unsafe or becoming homeless this
government has been clear that we are
determined to break a silence but
Samarra that surrounds victims to stamp
out the stigma and to strengthen our
support for survivors we've already
announced an extra 15 million pounds to
strengthen our support and an extra 60
million pounds is going directly to
refuge services but we recognize
the extra pressures that are being
created due to covert 19 and that that
necessitates more support while the
necessary social distancing measures
remain in place it is harder than before
for victims of domestic abuse to reach
out to their friends to their family to
colleagues and to neighbors for the
support that they urgently need today I
can announce a package of over 76
million pounds in new funding to support
the most vulnerable in society during
the pandemic this funding will help
charities support of survivors of
domestic and sexual abuse it will
support vulnerable children and their
families and you'll support victims of
modern slavery
additional support will ensure more safe
spaces and accommodation for survivors
of domestic abuse and their children and
the recruitment of additional counselors
for victims of sexual violence and this
funding will also help frontline
charities to be able to offer different
ways of supporting those in need
including virtual or phone based
services we know that some refugees have
had to reduce or even to cancel the
services that they would want to provide
during the pandemic this funding will
help them to meet the challenges posed
in this national emergency and to
continue to help those that desperately
need support I'd like to say a word of
thanks to domestic abuse charities who
are doing so much at this time to help
so many people
the women's aid refuge in my
constituency is one example and I'd like
to thank Marlene and her amazing team in
Newark people like that do incredible
work and deserve all our thanks and
gratitude now more than ever before
where refugees don't have enough
capacity to support those in need during
the pandemic some have asked us if they
could use hotels or other accommodation
nearby on a temporary basis for example
as move on accommodation where they
judge it to be safe and appropriate to
do so we will work with refugees to make
this option available to them if they
judge it to be the right one where it's
necessary and thank you also to
pharmacist such as boots who are
providing a safe space for victims of
domestic abuse in some of their shops
and are training more of their staff to
be able to support those people when
they come into the stores so they can
safely provide support
and contact services for help and advice
and for victims of domestic abuse
watching at home this afternoon let me
say once again that you are not alone
you do not have to stay at home you can
and should leave the home if you're in
danger
victims should call 999 if in an
emergency or if you're in danger and
you're unable to talk call 999 and then
press five five our outstanding police
will be there for you they will help you
and if you need support please call the
national domestic abuse helpline on olh
two thousand two four seven at anytime
secondly we've also been working with
councils and charities to protect those
who have been sleeping on our streets a
group that we know are particularly
vulnerable to kovat 19
we set out to bring people in from the
streets so far more than 5,400 rough
sleepers known to councils have been
offered safe accommodation in just under
a month ensuring that some of the most
vulnerable people can stay safe during
the pandemic this means that over 90% of
rough sleepers known to councils have
been offered accommodation where they
can self isolate in safety during the
crisis
this country is now viewed around the
world as having taken one of the most
intensive and successful approaches to
protecting rough sleepers during the
pandemic this was the right thing to do
by working with charities local councils
churches faith groups and volunteers
we've helped to protect thousands of
lives I am extremely grateful to
everybody who's been involved in this
phenomenal national effort
today I'm announcing that Dame Louise
Casey who is already leading a review
into rough sleeping and advising the
government on ending it within this
Parliament has been appointed by the
Prime Minister and I to spearhead this
new government initiative and she will
lead a new task force in this role she
will oversee our national effort to
ensure that the thousands of rough
sleepers now in safer accommodation
continue to receive the physical and the
mental health support that they need
while they self else ourselves isolate
during the pandemic and she will work
hand-in-hand with councils and with
other groups across the country to plan
how we can ensure that as many people as
possible can move into the long term
sustainable and safe accommodation that
they deserve once the pandemic is over
we're determined but as few people as
possible return to life on the streets
and I can think of nobody better than
Louise to help us to achieve this this
is a major challenge and I don't pretend
that this second phase will be easy or
that we will succeed in every case but
we will apply the same energy and
commitment and determination to this
national effort as we did to the first
and I'm certain that the charities the
councils the volunteers the people
across the length and breadth of the
country who have achieved so much in the
last month will do the same job again
thirdly and in closing I'd like to
update you on our shielding program for
those who have been identified by the
NHS as being extremely clinically
vulnerable due to underlying health
conditions that's now one point eight
million people in England alone
they have been asked to stay at home
with no face-to-face contact outside of
their house all except for their carers
for those of the people in the shielding
group who don't have family or friends
to support them we've offered to provide
a basic weekly package of food and
essentials and I'm delighted to say
today that we expect that the one
millionth shielded package will be
delivered in the next few days
this service is entirely without
precedent nothing on this scale has been
attempted in this country at least since
the Second World War
I'm incredibly proud of the team who've
helped us to deliver it I'd loved
reading the emails that I've received
from people who've got the boxes and
seeing the photos that have been posted
on social media I said at the start of
the process that there are many people
who we are asking to stay at home for a
prolonged period of time as a result of
the virus not least in the shielded
category but that we as a government and
as a country are determined that they
may be alone at home but they shouldn't
feel that they're on their own you're
not alone and you never will be
thank you very much Jenny um so earlier
in the week the Prime Minister made it
very clear that we had passed the peak
of the epidemic in the UK but also that
we had a lot of work still to do and in
the data that I'm going to present today
which shows all the hard work that
everyone at home has been continuing to
do we still do need to keep in mind that
we have five tests that we need to apply
for adjusting the lockdown so the first
one of these is that the NHS has
sufficient capacity to provide critical
care and specialist treatment right
across the UK and we'll look at the data
shortly and secondly a sustained and
consistent form in daily deaths from
coronavirus thirdly we need to have
reliable data to show that the rate of
infection is decreasing to manageable
levels across the board and the
increased testing capacity now and the
new serum prevalence testing will all
add to our ability to understand
infection rates across the UK falsely
there are operational challenges
including maintaining that testing and
in the PPE and that these are all in
hand with supply able to meet future
demand but I think the fifth one is the
one that we all need to keep in mind as
we go forward we have to be confident
that any of the adjustments to the
current measures which have worked so
well to help everyone keep safe and to
manage the peak and to keep the NHS
working through but those current
measures need to be very carefully and
adjusted in order that we do not risk a
second peak of infections that
overwhelms the NHS next time so how have
we been doing so we've often seen the
transport use change and I know we've
had a little bit of concern perhaps that
motor vehicle usage has flipped up a
little bit but we do know from other
evidence that in fact the number of
social interactions has stayed very low
and the fact that the our rate the
transmission rate of the disease is down
suggests that all of these fit together
so a very significant drop in transport
news accompanied by very good adherence
to social distancing next nine things as
you can see here
and as the Secretary of State has said
we have had a massive increase in daily
testing and you can see that as we've
gone forward so over 105,000 testing
that asked 24 hours up to 9 o'clock this
morning that will continue and if we
look at the next slide we can see how
that is now planning out between the NHS
testing in blue and the orange testing
which is the growth in the wider testing
capacity now obviously as the number of
cases in requiring clinical care in our
hospitals drops down and you can see
that in blue the orange testing pillars
are rising up that is despite the fact
that actually in the NHS all patients
coming in to the NHS now are being
tested
so there's likely to be a drop-off
because of the reduction in the number
of positive cases but there will then
start to be a bit of an increase again
in our blue pillars as we consistently
test through hospitals next items this
is the the slide I think which makes it
very clear what has happened with NHS
capacity this is a slide of the number
of people in hospital with Cove in 19
and you can see that over the last week
the number has actually decreased by
just over 13% and London which was
clearly very significantly affected has
now come back down to the sorts of
levels that are seen in other areas of
course that never means that people on
the frontline are not continuing to have
to work really hard but it does
demonstrate that the pressure on the NHS
is now moving down and we recognize that
in the fact that some NHS services are
now planning to ramp back up again
next silence so again this
reinforces that message so obviously the
sickest patients will require critical
care and this is our critical care bed
use that with Co vid 19 patients and
again in all countries in the UK we've
seen the rise as the peak in the
epidemic has moved on and those case
numbers now are starting to come down
excitons and then these are the the sad
deaths associated with kovat 19 and as
we're now reporting these are across all
settings the blue bars are the daily
totals and I think we are very familiar
now with the fact that sometimes those
individual totals can be record
recognized the delay in some of the
reporting but the orange line the
seven-day rolling average gives us an
indication of just how the death rate is
now starting to come down very gradually
and very slowly and it's really
important we continue to practice social
distancing and watch that come down
still further next night and then
finally with all the difficulties that
we have of comparing data globally the
UK data there in black is all setting so
this is as comparable as we can get with
other countries eventually we will look
back and see how that compares with
different mortality statistics but for
the time being I think that gives an
indication of where the UK is and
hopefully that that's now starting to
flatten oh thank you thanks Jenny
so the first question we're going to go
to is from a member of the public and
it's from Ashley from Yorkshire and
Ashley's questions that have shown in a
short video the World Health
Organization has recently suggested that
people who have already recovered from
carbon 19 may not be immune to a second
infection what evidence is there to
suggest that people can catch carbon 19
and how would a vaccine change this
thank you thank you
ashle and so quite a complicated answer
and I'll just try and summarize I think
the the w-h-o position is very similar
to the one that we would have it
basically says we actually don't have
enough information yet to be very clear
on the immune status we know that some
people will have different status we
would normally expect to see some sign
of immunity about since 12 days after an
infection and then a very consistent
pattern about 28 days but there's
sometimes a delay in different
individuals and we need to study this
really carefully as we go forward
our testing policy and the development
of new antibody tests will help us do
that I think so some good news and some
not-so-good news so I think for example
in the elderly we know that antibody
responses can be quite problematic they
tend not to respond as well so this is
clearly a vulnerable group and so for
them we sometimes have to make different
preparations or pay particular attention
to vaccination policies but I think
we're also starting to see with some
very small pieces of evidence now from
people in this country who have had
coded 19 and we know where they have
been tested positive and then we have
looked for their antibodies there's a
very large percentage of these who've
otherwise been pretty well do actually
have quite a good response how long
that's going to last and whether it will
just provide an antibody response say
for one season or for two or three years
ahead we don't know so still lots of
uncertainties but I think still a lot of
positive hope for a vaccine Thank You
Jenny and the second question from a
member of the public is from Paul in the
East Midlands and Paul's question is the
Trussell trust have reported an 81%
increase in food parcels to those in
desperate need in the last two weeks of
March alone what more will the
government do to help those who were
already in dire need and which has been
made worse because of coronavirus but
it's a good question from Paul and we
know that the
impact of the virus affects us all it's
indiscriminate but we know that some
groups in society after are affected
particularly seriously and so the
response that the government has taken
as being to try to support all of those
in society I've already spoken about
those who we've asked to be shielded
because of specific clinical conditions
underlying health issues before the
advent of the virus those individuals
have access if they need it to the food
parcels delivered centrally by
government I'm also working as local
government secretary with local councils
who have done a fantastic job at
bringing together community groups faith
groups and volunteers in different parts
of the country to ensure that other
vulnerable people the elderly for
example can get food and medicines and
essential supplies that they might need
even if they're not technically within
the shielded category and there are
hundreds of thousands of food parcels
and other supplies being delivered by
them every day all over the country and
if people want to volunteer to support
those efforts then I'd encourage you to
get in touch with your local council who
has probably set up a hub to to organize
that work or to go onto the Good
Samaritan app at which you can see
opportunities to volunteer being posted
there and then of course through our
economic response we've set out to try
to help as many different people as we
possibly can whether that's through the
job retention scheme to try to ensure
that those people who are in work can
retain the essential link with their
company so that they can get paid and
can return to work where we start to
ease the lockdown measures and the
economy can bounce back as quickly as
possible for those who already in the
welfare system we've tried to make that
more generous in a number of different
ways through Universal Credit through
the local housing allowance for example
and there are there are other ways that
we can take action as well I've set out
today a number of ways in which we're
trying to support but
particularly vulnerable groups such as
rough sleepers on our streets and as I
said we've made some significant
progress on that but some of those
groups will need consistent support and
care from us as a government from local
councils and from society in the weeks
ahead and then obviously in the future
we want to ensure that we emerge from
this crisis as strongly as we can and
support those people to begin to rebuild
the economy and people's lives more
generally
now I'm going to turn to the first
question from the media and that's from
Chris Mason from the BBC good afternoon
Chris yeah good afternoon to You
Secretary of State so good afternoon dr.
Harris a question for each of you if I
may I first want to mister generique
we're hearing a lot about the potential
loosening of the lockdown in the coming
weeks for many people but as you've been
touching on there a good number of
people who are shielding who are
contemplating many many many more months
potentially of being stuck at home now
mostly acknowledge the unprecedented
nature of what you have done so far but
I wonder what long-term plans there are
to help those people out not just in
terms of the provision of food but also
at their mental health mayor and their
general well-being and a question for
that dr. Harris and a request for an
update on track and trace if I may in
the context of the scaling of testing
capacity I'm wondering how many daily
tests you're going to need for the track
and tracing in a few weeks to be able to
be fully operational I wonder where we
are in terms of an updating the staff
that are being trained and the extent to
which that system needs to be fully up
and running before we'll see any
noticeable shift in an ease of the
restrictions around lockdown
thank you very much Chris well if I
answer the question first about those
people we've asked to be shielded and it
and it's a good question because we've
now got one point eight million people
in England alone who for clinical
reasons are extremely vulnerable to
coronavirus who we've asked to stay at
home and when we initially did that
which began five weeks ago we said that
it would be for a minimum of 12 weeks
which was in a very significant amount
of time and we appreciate the huge
emotional impact that has upon people
about not having access to friends to
family to the outside world as well as
the practicalities we've tried to
support people with the practical steps
as I say for those people who don't have
access to family or friends or neighbors
nearby they can if they need have our
food boxes delivered to them and we're
now delivering 300,000 of those every
week we appreciated that two fairly
rudimentary service so we've also helped
those people by sharing that data with
the major supermarket chains so if those
people would prefer not to receive our
food boxes they can get privileged
deliveries from their supermarket of
choice the NHS through the pharmacy
network is also trying to help them to
get access to the medicines that they
would ordinarily rely on and local
councils are also being shared the data
on who those people are within their
local community so that they can step in
and provide more support and more
tailored support to those people so if
you have particular medical or dietary
requirements and the boxes don't suit
you then local councils can step in and
provide a better quality of service to
those people we're also encouraging
councils to begin a check-in and chat
service so that we get as many of those
people as possible phoned up usually by
volunteers but sometimes by council
staff to just make sure they're okay
they're getting the supplies they need
and if there's anything else that they
need we can try to step in and do that
there's also a concern about people's
mental health being confined at home for
a long period of time but particularly
those people who don't have any of the
in their household and so we're working
with national charities who have the
expertise there to try to support those
individuals I think there's a question
about what we do next and we are
thinking about what further steps we can
provide to people if they're being asked
to stay at home for an even longer
period than they already have and
whether there's more than we can do to
ensure they get all of the support that
they need
but if Jenny does anybody else does that
or answer so just picking up the
shielded group I think from a clinical
perspective when the pandemic the
epidemic came to the UK clearly we had
limited evidence and we have used vers
principles and plausibility to
understand who we thought would be most
at risk now in fact as time goes on of
course we get far more evidence both
from overseas and from treating our own
patients and some of that evidence we
started to see differential clinical
conditions so for example not just
respiratory conditions but issues to do
with the immune system and with clotting
for example so but we're also have a
very strong trial process looking at
different drugs that might be useful and
in fact some of the things are giving
slightly perverse answers so for example
a drug which an individual might
normally take say for very severe
arthritis which you would expect to
suppress their immune system might
actually be quite helpful in in the mode
of action in Kovac 19 so in brief what
we are doing is trying to review that
because we do recognize that asking
somebody to stay shielded for their own
health protection for a very long period
of time and it may be several months is
is a quite a difficult thing for them to
do so we're doing two things one is
actually looking at those risks again
now we have more information and try and
build a better more stratified picture
and then the second one is that working
with NHS England looking at what
clinical needs these people might have
and how services could be adapted for
them over a much longer period and that
includes things like mental health
services to people who are at home or
how one can safety and consistently
provide virtual services to this group
and at which point you shouldn't do that
and you should actually ask them to come
into a clinical setting so both the
longer-term clinical management and the
the risk going forward and so that
probably helps that one the one around
track and trace so clearly we will want
to be testing this going forward in a
small way before rolling it out it's I
think there are still a number of
uncertainties all of which are under
consideration very exciting in the sense
that for views who perhaps don't
understand the principles clearly it's
about if somebody has symptoms they take
themselves out of society as they would
know but anybody who has been in contact
with them in a very anonymized and safe
data managed way using a phone app will
be alerted now there are some key points
here so the testing one which you
highlighted clearly we want to have very
quick tests we do not want to be asking
contacts to stay isolated for a long
period of time if the initial person who
triggered the alarm so to speak actually
turns out not to have coded so there's a
speed issue it's also an issue that not
everybody will be able to operate a
digital system so elderly people are
unlikely perhaps and also less likely
rather to be using an app on a mobile
phone so it needs to be a hybrid system
and you highlighted about contact
tracing it can sound quite simple but
actually we need to be looking forward
and backwards as well we need to be
asking lots of questions so I think
public health England have already said
they're looking for around 3000 clinical
staff from 15,000 tracing staff all of
that discussion is on there are some
very experienced people already in
public health teams and local
authorities for example working under
directors of public health and in public
health England as well but clearly to
get this up and running at scale and
effectively is another significant task
and and but lots of preparation underway
great thank you very much Union thank
you Chris the question our next question
dan Huot of ITV dan yeah did Chris want
to follow up sorry I think Chris writes
follow up there
but I didn't here Chris yeah if you want
Chris yeah you know thank you I
appreciate the courtesy I'll keep this
quick a Secretary of State you talked
about your thinking about what further
steps around helping for the shield they
had like right on and what they may be
and briefly dr. Harris I've seemed like
quite a long list of things before track
and trace will be fully up and running
is it a long way off well for the
shielded I think one priority is to
ensure that those who want to move off
our food boxes onto privileged access in
the supermarkets can do so and the
supermarkets are doing great work in
increasing their capacity to do delivery
services and as capacity Rises we will
have more options to help the shielded
to get access to those services as I say
we'd like to do much more for people's
mental health and that's working with
charities like mind for example who have
the expertise to do this and we are
working with local councils to check in
with people more often if there's more
that we need to do and more bespoke
services particularly for the most
vulnerable people in this category then
obviously we will do you've got to
remember there's a broad range of people
within the shield that category it's not
all the elderly for example there are a
number of younger people there are there
are children within the shielded
category living with their parents so
we'll need to cut with more tailored
answers I think if the shielding program
is to continue for a longer period of
time and so we look at the different
types in groups of people within
shielding and what in particular those
people who don't have family friends and
neighbors to support them might need it
is going to be sustainable in the longer
term thank you and you asked about time
period I think both yes and no so for a
whole population we need the whole
population to work with us on this it's
quite an exciting adventure where is a
bit like social distancing everybody has
to do it together to get it to work and
on the example of how people have worked
on the social distancing I'm sure this
will be successful but if we want
everybody to do it we have to be
absolutely sure that it will work and so
the the short question is no we will be
we need those
answers but we need to be trialing it
and we will be doing that very soon
very good thanks Chris I hope that
answers your questions dan thank you
good asking the both of you now first of
all soaped real estate and rolls-royce
is the latest business from the
aerospace industry we understand could
cut thousands of jobs with and the
British workforce bearing the brunt and
given we've seen job cuts announcements
from British Airways and Ryanair this
week and the decimation of the aviation
industry as a result of coronavirus what
more is the government prepared to do to
help this industry and the question and
not terrify made following up on what
chris is talking about contact tracing
could you define exactly what you mean
by contact so what level of contact are
we talking in for someone to then
isolate well thank you Dan
well obviously the aviation industry is
both extremely important one
strategically for us as a country and
one which employs a great deal of people
across the country so it's one that we
we want to support in any way we can
we're very conscious of the challenges
it faces locked down in the UK as around
the country around the world is posing
enormous challenges to it and it's
grappling with what the longer-term
demand for its services might be in an
age in which social distancing will be
important and in which business travel
for example might be different we've
obviously put in place unprecedented
support for businesses and that applies
as well to the aviation and Airport
sectors the job retention scheme for
example is available to the employers
that you've just listed I know some of
them are already making use of it and as
a country we're paying part of the wages
now of millions of people that's the
right thing to do it's to protect
people's livelihoods and to retain that
essential link between the employer and
the employee so that when we are able to
reopen those parts of the economy we can
hope that there's less economic scarring
and more people can return to their
companies and the economy as a whole can
bounce back but the transport secretary
and the Chancellor are particularly
focused on the aviation sector and as
government sector I'm particularly
focused on those parts of the country
that rely on their local airports like
Manchester Airport for example which
plays a key part in its regional economy
if there's more that we can do to help
and support them through a very
difficult period we will do so Jenny
thank you and so it whether it's copied
or not any infectious disease the
traditional way if you like which is
what we will use here but with a knack
of trying to contain the spread of the
disease I identify those people who may
be at heightened risk at heightened
exposure of whatever the infectious
agent is now it a close we always talk
about close contacts but a close contact
may vary with an individual disease so
if we look back at Ebola for example it
is a contact transmission somebody
touches somebody else body fluids that
is the prime route of transmission in
this case of course there is a
respiratory risk of transmission there
is also a contact one obviously which is
why we're all washing our hands as well
but the respiratory route is the prime
route into the body for the virus so
there are a number of different
categories of contact that we would
describe as close contact so the primary
ones usually are people who are living
in the same household and that is of
course why we have self isolation of
family isolation rules if you're
symptomatic but it may be a particular
if you've been in an environment so for
example in close face-to-face proximity
with somebody who is known to be
symptomatic or b-positive that also
would be a close contact and the
individual will be at heightened risk of
disease the other issue about it is
about the time that you have spent with
them and how far away your contact with
the individual was so whether you're
close to them in proximity were actually
physically but equally how long ago you
met them because if you somebody had
their disease more than 14 days ago for
an incubation period of 14 days you're
probably out of that risk so number of
different elements that we look at to
classify whether you're a close
contact but all of them the same
underlying principle and what the
contact tracing will do on the digital
art is identify people who have been in
close proximity to a person who declares
themselves symptomatic or is positive
and testing so it doesn't solve all the
issues of contact tracing and that's why
we need the army if you like of
individuals to followup with some of
these to identify other routes that are
the risks perhaps that could be
associated with the positive case thanks
Jane is very calm president is there any
further question you'd like to ask a on
me on the Rolls Royce and question
Chancellor has previously said that he
would consider potentially even spoke
support for the aviation ministry and
only as a last resort has wondered what
that last resort will have to look like
before maybe the government could
consider it would consider a specific
package for me aviation industry beyond
the measure here announces moment ago
yes well both the Chancellor and in this
case the transport sector but the
business actually are working with all
sectors at the economy I certainly I'm
in my own area of housing and
construction to understand the specific
concerns that they face to help to guide
them as to what the second phase of the
virus might mean in the second phase of
our response to the virus might mean in
terms of social distancing in the way
that we can begin at the right time to
reopen our economy we've tried to design
the specific interventions that we
brought forward like the business loan
scheme for example to be as helpful as
possible to those key sectors but if
there's further steps that are required
that I'm sure the Chancellor and the
Business Secretary will will think that
through in conversation with major
employers like Rolls Royce if I could
take the next question now please from
Harriet line from the Press Association
good afternoon and good afternoon
Secretary of State how will you manage
to do contact tracing successfully if
not enough people download the app and
will the level of download be key to a
decision on when to lift the lockdown
measures and to dr. Harry's on the 4,000
new cases of coronavirus he just
mentioned do
where people are now getting it do you
have an estimation of how many of these
cases are frontline workers patients in
hospital or people picking it up in
supermarkets Thank You Harry well
contact tracing will rely on all of us
in society playing our part but I'm
optimistic about the prospects for that
this has been a national effort so far
if you think of the different measures
that we brought forward the restrictions
that the vast majority of people have
got behind it and I think that they will
do again when we're able to launch the
app on a national scale and the NHS in
this country is particularly dear to all
of our hearts and so I think there's
every reason to believe that the UK of
any country will take this seriously
will the people will download the app
and will play their part but the app is
is one important element of contact
tracing but it's not the only one
they'll also be as jenny has said the
people that we'll be recruiting to be
making contact with individuals and
those if they've come into contact with
so it will be a multi-faceted strategy
with the app at its heart but with well
trained individuals to try to support it
as well
Jenny thank you and yes it's an
interesting question when you have a
large number of cases in the community
we have and we have sustained community
transmission it perhaps not well it's
not as easy but it's also if we're
asking everybody to stay at home
actually doing the individual contact
tracing doesn't contain disease people
are sitting at home and containing it
themselves effectively and as you've
highlighted this whole combination of
digital apps contact tracing and
understanding where pockets of
transmission are that can be contained
potentially as we go forward to get us
out of the social distancing measures is
really important there are some areas
where we know and we always look to see
what that is because we will have
community elements but we also know that
clearly many cases will be treated in
hospital so that's one area where we
look in detail we also have a very
particular focus on social care
environments and care
at the moment and then as we get the
results from the contact tracing we will
start to understand where the lines if
you like of transmission are it's not
possible to do that when there are huge
numbers of people with the disease in
the community but as we're starting to
drop that down we can follow some of
them through and I think one of the
really exciting things we understand by
a number of different routes so we have
an ons surveillance program on
understanding not just the prevalence of
disease but trying to look at how that
perhaps spreads within families so we
start to build a picture up of how the
virus spreads in communities but I think
also there are some genomic studies so
looking at the whole genome sequence
which allows you to see over time where
one individual perhaps has passed the
same genomic sequence to virus on to the
next person and that is very interesting
work it's still in quite an early phase
and I think we will learn a lot from
that so the whole combined means we
start to understand disease transmission
and very importantly how we content Ain
it going forward thank you hurry do you
contend with that all of you got a
follow-up question for general much just
on these new cases so you don't have a
breakdown of where those people have
come from presumably they're going to
testing centers because they take one
but you not got data to show whether
they're from my workers and then test I
don't have that data to be able to did
it to give that to you at the moment but
clearly as we do more tests as well we
will get more information back from the
testing in an anonymized way to
understand actually where the prevalence
of disease is heightened so yes
absolutely we do look at this and there
are a number of subgroups nosocomial so
that's infection can spread if you like
in care settings and in care homes where
we're absolutely focusing on that
because we're looking for any
opportunities to interrupt transmission
and make sure people are kept so that's
right and and we have a particular focus
on care homes and ensuring that the
tests again
to those people who need them there and
that's both the tests that are delivered
to people's homes which is the most
accessible way of getting a test
particularly if you're a busy care home
worker but also using the mobile units
and so in scheduling the mobile units
program progress around their local
areas we're ensuring that local councils
and the local resilience forums play a
part so that they come to locations
which are actually accessible the people
who are working in care homes and more
of those units will be available next
week and will be particularly focused on
trying to ensure that not just capacity
is there but it's actually readily
available and accessible to those people
who need it the most an important
category which will be care home workers
and residents thank you our next
question comes from Toby helm of the
observer Toby hello a question for the
secretary of state first of all um it
seems like an age ago but it was a few
weeks ago that Patrick balance and
Professor Witte were telling us that we
were much more likely to catch
coronavirus having a pub than we were to
go to a outdoor mass gathering football
match can we take it from back there for
that we as when we consider measures to
ease the law that we're likely to see
permission given for mass gatherings to
resume if for we will see the mission
for pubs to reopen and if not why not
and a question for dr. Harris if I may
just following up from my colleague from
the Press Association there can we
assume that the number of new cases of
infection which are quite high I see
today but
there is a much higher proportion of new
cases among frontline NHS workers than
the general public at large and does
that but what does that tell us about
our failings in delivering PPE untimed
those workers thank you - if I answer
your question - to me first before
handing over to Jenny the the Prime
Minister has said that now that we have
passed the peak of the virus it's the
right time for us to begin to consider
how we should be responding to the
country in the next phase and he's going
to be setting out next week in more
detail our thinking in that area and to
inform and advise him across government
we have been thinking about different
settings whether that's in the workplace
on public transport in schools or
outdoors what sorts of steps might
members of the public families or
employers take to ensure that those
settings are as safe as possible when it
is right to ease the restrictions in
those particular settings the very
strong advice today is that that moment
is not yet come and that members of the
public watching this afternoon should
continue to stick to our message which
is to stay at home protect the NHS and
by doing that to save people's lives but
you're right to say and Jenny as it can
give her medical opinion to this that
the rate of transmission is
significantly less outdoors than indoors
and so when it is right to ease lockdown
measures that will be a factor that we
will take into consideration but
obviously there's an interconnectedness
between that and other things like
public transport which make this a more
complex picture and that's the type of
analysis that's now being done across
government informed by Sage and the
medical experts so that the Prime
Minister is in the right position to
make those decisions at the right time
Jenny thank you and it's probably quite
a helpful example for explaining to
people these apparent discrepancies
advice or understanding the real trick
in your question is whether you go to
the outdoor event via the pub or whether
you leave the pub journey out of it so
the virus itself will not survive as
long in the outdoors
ultraviolet all sorts of things so
generally outdoor environments are safer
and you'll see from a lot of our advice
people who are inside we suggest that
they open the windows and let you know
fresh air and in so generally outdoor
environments are safer but it depends
how you go to your outdoor environment
and what you do so if you go as a family
unit and and sit in one place and you've
got the same exposure there that you
would in your house at home that's
property of quite a safe environment if
you go with a whole load of friends that
you haven't seen from before the
coronavirus locked down sit in a pub in
a very small environment lean well over
each other on the table and stay there
for some hours face-to-face that's
really not a good thing to do and I
think sometimes people will get confused
with the activities that they do before
the event and then the event itself and
the other example of course is people
all piling into cars together and that
is a potentially high risk if it's your
family unit you're all exposed to the
same as you would be at home but if you
pick up all your mates on the way to the
outdoor event not a good thing at all so
don't go to the pub on the way it's
probably the one to reduce your risk
because I recognize that everybody is
wanting to do that and you're talking
about new cases I think in the
proportion so I think as a doctor if I
go to work in a clinical environment I
recognized that my risk generally
whether it be Co Vidor or other diseases
is higher simply because we are treating
patients with illnesses and we do
recognise that there will be some
transmission potentially within
healthcare settings and that does apply
and I think we're starting to see very
strong evidence both from
internationally but also very specific
initial studies we've done in this
country
care homes which is why we have such a
strong focus on care homes and there is
an issue in care homes as a particular
issue because the residents themselves
may not show the same symptoms that we
might have a main be not show them as
early as as younger people
so yes we do expect to have high rates
and yes there are studies ongoing
clearly if infection prevention control
measures in health invite health care
environments are not good and that's not
just about PPE PPE is an important part
of it and we need the PPE at the
frontline but it is also about
systematic processes of managing
infection because when we're using PPE
it sits on this background of
continuously washing your hands
disposing of things carefully and safely
so PP is an important element but it
will not be the only one and we are
looking across different healthcare
settings to see if we can identify where
there are particular risks perhaps
there's quite a lot of variation thanks
a Toby would you like to ask a follow-up
question would we I know everybody's on
deadline but just the secretary of state
so could we therefore would it be right
to assume that we might expect greater
and faster relaxation and sort of
outdoor socializing rules than indoor
socializing rules just well we're going
to be setting out our thoughts next week
on that so I can't go into into much
further detail on that for you now but
obviously we'll be guided by the
scientific evidence and as you've heard
from Jenny and myself there is evidence
that outdoor settings are are better but
it's highly interconnected with other
factors as Jenny elaborated very well
including how you get there and whether
you're mixing with people outside of
your own household so it's not quite as
simple as it might seem at first glance
for now as the measures are certainly
still in place we're very focused on are
there safe things that we can do which
do make the lockdown more bearable and
livable for people and those often are
outdoor activities so for it
we've worked very hard to ensure that
all parks are open and all bar handful
in the country are now open that people
can go visit cemeteries and graveyards
to see their loved ones graves and that
for example you can go and visit the
local tip and take your rubbish and
recycling there as long as you do so
safely only with your household and
observing social distancing measures so
the more things we can do that make the
lockdown more bearable and more socially
just we will do thank you very much Toby
and the next question is David
Williamson from the Sunday Express David
Thank You Secretary of State how
seriously is the government
investigating concerns that China may
have been less than transparent when
coronavirus first appeared and if it's
shown that this actually hampered
efforts to prevent a global pandemic
well Britain be at the forefront of the
bid to claim billions in reparations
well well thanks David well as the the
foreign secretary and the Prime Minister
said in the past at the moment as you
would expect we are 100% focused on
trying to tackle coronavirus that's what
all parts of government as as they did
many many other people across the
country are focused upon that's the
right thing to do there will come a time
when we will want to analyze the origins
of the virus in detail and consider the
actions of other countries but that's
not now the task for us as a government
now is to ensure that we get the United
Kingdom through the virus as best as we
possibly can
and to work internationally with our
friends and partners who want to come
together whether that's on vaccine
research or where one of the world's
leading contributors to that or the
international supply of equipment like
ventilators and PPE which includes very
important that imports to the UK from
China but we will want to consider
what's happened carefully in the future
if I can just follow up on that our
polling shows but there is huge I needs
about the idea of going back to normal
life and has even been suggested that
perhaps the government's campaign has
been a little too successful how would
you persuade what it overcomes their
fear by venturing back into normal life
and perceived economy won't be message
essentially be sticking your opera lips
and go for a chop well that the the the
good news is that the message that was
crafted by scientists and leading medics
like Jenny and her colleagues has been
listened to by the vast majority of
people across the country people did
adhere to the restrictions although they
were very difficult for people's lives
we heard earlier in this press
conference that 1.8 million people have
been asked to stay at home with almost
no face-to-face contact outside of their
household and yet most of those people
appear to have done it to protect
themselves and to protect the rest of
the country we're going to think
carefully and the Prime Minister will be
saying more about this next week about
how we can approach the next phase of
the virus and again we'll be guided by
medical opinion and I think you heard
when the Prime Minister spoke at the
press conference the other day that we
will be taking a careful cautious
approach to that because the overriding
objective is to ensure that the rate of
transmission remains below one that we
build in some Headroom there to protect
the NHS and ensure that it doesn't get
overwhelmed at a later phase by a second
peak and so as we begin to think in the
future about easing those lockdown
measures it will be approached in a very
careful manner and monitored on each
occasion to ensure that we're not seeing
that rate of transmission rise to an
uncontrollable level and an exponential
rise in the virus and in that way we'll
slowly bring the country out of the
measures that we've been through and to
a slow return to normality Jenny and
just to support that I think I mean we
recognize it was a very good interval
assessing
this morning with a public health
professor from Edinburgh zinc
highlighting the behavioural aspects of
this so both being in quarantine or
tucked away in your own home has very
significant psychological effects but as
you've highlighted actually people need
very clear messaging to understand when
when they can come out and to be
reassured that it's safe and and
whenever you're handling any public
health response actually it's always
really critical to consider how people
are feeling about it is is not just
about the science of how the bug gets
around because a lot of the
interventions that you use are
completely unsuccessful and like here if
people are perhaps not familiar with why
you're trying to do things and to
understand them so I think as the
secretary of state said as we've gone
into this managing the peak the public
have been brilliant in following that
social distancing advice and we need to
make sure that we explain the different
interventions that have proposed why
we're doing that so that they can
understand I think and and hopefully
supportive thank you thanks David and
the last question if I may is from daily
Wooding from Sun on Sunday now good
afternoon one issue which is raised
constantly by our readers is children
and schools they're being deprived of
their education that the parents wonder
how they can go back to work even if
they if they are able to return back to
work and also elderly people who fear an
extended lockdown even when the world or
the country starts to return to
something like normal can you give some
hope to parents of children whose
education is being put on hold and also
to the older people who feel and if I
may just add a quick one on on the app
which you've talked a little bit about
today I'm told it relies on about 80
percent of people using that app yet
whatsapp which is quite a popular system
being used has only got 67 percent of
the population using it and that was set
up 11 years ago
so how is that gonna work well thanks
Dave well on the app as I've said I
think there's reason to believe that
given the nature of the crisis given the
overwhelming national response from
people in all parts the country so far
that people will get behind it will
download it you can see the
international examples of other
countries that have had some success in
this area but the UK I think is
well-positioned because we're both the
country which is fairly advanced in
terms of technology and where there's
great affection for the NHS and people
want to get behind this as a course so
I'm certainly optimistic that there will
be a good response to that in terms of
schools
well the cetera State Gavin Williamson
has said that we're not today able to
give a date to parents for the return of
schools he has said that that's going to
be done carefully and may well be in a
phased manner and he's working very
closely with teachers the schools and
with the unions to ensure that all of
the necessary measures are put in place
to begin to plan that when it's the
right time to deploy it we're very
focused on how we can ensure that all
children get a good quality of education
whilst they are at home and I understand
how difficult that can be homeschooling
is is not easy particularly when one or
both parents are trying to work from
home as well and I've seen the anecdotal
evidence so far but important evidence
nonetheless of the differences in the
quality of education being delivered to
different children and some of the most
vulnerable children in society appearing
to receive less education than those in
in other households it's for that reason
that the Education Secretary has taken
steps such as ensuring that households
that don't have internet access can
receive modems and connections if they
need it that children whose parents
don't have tablets or computers
available to them can get access to
those and they can do online learning
that we
created the oak Academy the online
learning resource for children and for
teachers and will take further steps
that we need to as local government
secretary I'm very focused on those
children who we know are vulnerable and
who would otherwise have been supported
and monitored in the school setting but
who are now in many cases at home and
less visible and local councils are
doing a very good job there at trying to
maintain contact with that through
visits not always possible their social
distancing but where it isn't phone
calls Skype or zoom meetings to try and
have a conversation with them their
parents or their their carers and that's
a particular focus for us in in the days
and weeks ahead thank you so I think
just on the epidemiology of disease and
children I think is really what you were
asking there's a background to some of
that question we are continuously in
contact so a lot of clinical colleagues
link routinely with specialists in other
countries because at the moment there
are a number of different approaches but
actually we're probably all looking at
the same evidence and concluding and
judging that within our own settings and
the social setting may be different as
well what we do know for children is
that if they get infected
they tend or younger children properly
tend to have less clinical disease and
if they have clinical disease ie they
show some symptoms it they tend to
progress less frequently to severe
disease so that's pretty good the bit
that is perhaps still in the unknown box
at the moment and some of our prevalent
studies will really help us understand
is is the transmission of disease the
the the quality of the evidence is quite
difficult at the moment so you shouldn't
take this as the truth but it does there
are some signs that put it that way that
potentially younger children and I mean
say infant junior school-age are less
susceptible to disease and potentially
transmitted it less but those are very
early indicators if you like and they
need testing with proper robust evidence
one of the things which is important is
older children I think the evidence is
far less clear and there may be some
biological reasons for that for the way
if children are older children handle
disease and going through puberty for
example but the thing that's really
important actually about settings is is
actually how children interact with
communities so I think it's not just
about the transmission of disease we
need to be thinking about what are the
behaviors that go with it it's a bit
like that have you gone to the pub on
the way to the outdoor event actually
younger children might well be much
safer settings because on the whole
parents aren't taking them so far they
may be going in a buggy to the local
primary school or whatever it is whereas
older children may be traveling longer
distances so whole number of behavioral
issues as well that need to be thought
through when we have firmer evidence
thanks and Dave would you like a follow
up question some kind of hope for them
to sue them Karl we had a question from
a member of the public the other day who
said that they couldn't hold their
grandchildren which I think struck the
cord with a loss of people absolutely
I'm sorry I didn't answer your question
there look I think it's very difficult
for those people who we've asked to stay
at home and that's but if the shielded
who have the extreme clinical reason to
stay at home to protect themselves but
also just the many many other people who
having taken our advice have chosen to
stay at home and we want to be able to
offer them the hope that we're getting
through this and there's going to be in
time a return to normality I think the
the fact that we've passed the peak is
great and that's as a result of all of
the hard work that people have put in
across the country those working in the
NHS and social care on the front line
but also the millions of people who
chose to stay at home not least the
elderly from our part in central
government what we're saying
we're going to do everything we can to
continue to support them whether that's
through the delivery of our food boxes a
million of those delivered already
ensuring that they get the medicines
that they need ensuring that people are
phoning them for their mental health and
if there's further steps that we need to
do to help to make life for that group
of people more bearable more livable
more humane in the weeks and months to
come then absolutely we'll do that Jenny
I think you I don't think so I think it
refers back to the old way obviously if
we have more evidence as that grows and
we can use that for example perhaps with
younger children and transmission then
we can perhaps make different
recommendations but just just - it is
important I think that older people it
is very clear that they are generally at
increased risk and particularly people
with specific underlying conditions
who've been advised to shield it's it's
for them to choose but I think we all
want to make sure that they stay safe so
while we're at we're not we are over the
peak but we're not out of it by a long
way and so we would still advise them to
keep taking those precautionary steps
absolutely and none of us would want the
restrictions to last a day longer than
is necessary but for that group of
people in particular especially the
shielded it really is important for
their own protection thank you very much
David thank you to everybody watching at
home this afternoon